# DAESC: Differential Allelic Expression Analysis using Single-Cell data

DAESC is a software for differential allele-specific expression (ASE) analysis using single-cell RNA-seq data of multiple individuals. It can be applied to any comparison of interested that can be represented by a design matrix, including but not limited to: 1) discrete cell types 2) continuous cell states (e.g. pseudotime) 3) case-control disease status 4) continuous phenotype of the donors (e.g. BMI, blood pressure). DAESC includes two components: DAESC-BB and DAESC-Mix.

* DAESC-BB is a beta-binomial regression model with individual-specific random-effects to capture the sample repeat structure arising from having multiple cells per individual. It is the baseline model of DAESC and can be used regardless of sample size.
* DAESC-Mix is an extended model from DAESC-BB incorporating implicit haplotype phasing. Implicit phasing is conducted against the the cis-regulatory genetic variant or epigenetic alteration that causes ASE, which is usually **unobserved**.In the eQTL setting, for example, the eQTL that drives the ASE is not observed. Its expression-increasing allele can be on the haplotype of either the alternative or the reference allele of the exonic SNP where ASE is assessed (eSNP). As a result, different individuals may have opposite allelic imbalance actually representing the same regulatory effect. If not addressed, allelic imbalance will cancel each other across individuals, leading to diminished signal. DAESC-Mix uses latent variables to capture both possibilities, leading to a mixture model. DAESC-Mix can be used when the number of individuals is reasonably large (e.g. N>=20). 
